---
toc: true
layout: post
comments: true
image: images/The_GNU_logo.png
permalink: /manage-dotfiles-with-gnu-stow/
description: A guide to manage all the dotfiles.
categories: [dotfiles, GNU stow, setup-dev-env]
title: Manage dotfiles with GNU Stow 
---
In this post, I will try to guide in organise your dotfiles in the cloud and manage them
using GNU Stow. 

## What are dotfiles?
For a casual user, the term *dotfiles* may sound strange and confusing but it is nothing
but application(app) configuration files in *developer* talk. The apps generally refer to
certain files to configure itself. 

People usually store these files in a remote location such as a Github repository and
retrieve them when needed.

Dotfiles allow personalisation. They can be restored in a new machine saving time. 
Preparing and organising the dotfiles with some initial effort, help developers save a lot of **time** later. 

A few examples of dotfiles are *.bashrc*, *.vimrc*, *.gitignore*. 

{% include alert.html text="Warning: Pay attention to personal information inside these
files. Never store secure keys, passwords in public domains." %}

### Things to know
- Which app's config files need to stored.
- Where do those config files are located.

### Common config files that need storing
- `.bashrc` or `.zshrc`
- `.vimrc` or `init.vim`(in the case of neovim)
- `.gitignore_global` and `.gitconfig` i
- Terminal emulator config files
- IDE of choice config files

In fact, if there is an app that you have configured heavily and frequently use, its
config files must be stored. In the case the said app doesn't allow exporting of
configurations, it is highly recommended to move onto one that allows it. 

### Where are most required dotfiles located?
Most files are present in `$HOME` or `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME` directories. `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME` 
defines the base directory relative to which user-specific configuration files 
should be stored. If `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME` is either not set or empty, 
a default equal to `$HOME/.config` should be used. 

## GNU Stow
Some prominent results when googled for storing dotfiles are [this Atlassian tutorial](https://www.atlassian.com/git/tutorials/dotfiles) 
and using [*yadm*](https://yadm.io/). However, I found those harder to start using. 

[GNU Stow](https://www.gnu.org/software/stow/) on the other hand is an easy to use symlink
farm manager. As described in their website, it takes distinct packages of software and/or data 
located in separate directories on the filesystem, and makes them appear to be installed in the same place.

This strategy works brilliantly for dotfiles. Borrowing explanation from [Brandon Invergo's article](http://brandon.invergo.net/news/2012-05-26-using-gnu-stow-to-manage-your-dotfiles.html):
> The procedure is simple. I created the `${HOME}/dotfiles` directory and then inside it I made subdirectories for all the programs whose configurations I wanted to manage. Inside each of those directories, I moved in all the appropriate files, maintaining the directory 
structure of my home directory. So, if a file normally resides at the top level of your home directory, it would go into the top level of the program’s subdirectory. If a file
normally goes in the default `${XDG_CONFIG_HOME}/${PKGNAME}` location `(${HOME}/.config/${PKGNAME})`, then it would instead go in
`${HOME}/dotfiles/${PKGNAME}/.config/${PKGNAME}` and so on. 

### Install Stow

```shell
sudo apt stow # Ubuntu

brew install stow # Homebrew Mac
```

### Placing the files
Now, it might look complex at first. Let me explain with some examples. 
- `.bashrc` or `.zshrc` are present/needed in `$HOME` directory, so inside `$HOME/dotfiles`
  create a subdirectory with `bashrc` or `zshrc` and place the original `.bashrc` or
  `.zshrc` file appropriately inside their folder. GNU Stow understands that the dotfile,
  when symlinked, will create a symlink-copy in the `$HOME` directory. For future
  modifications, file in either locations can be edited. But for simplicity, use
  `$HOME/dotfiles` directory.
- A complicated example would be a config file located deep inside subfolders: nvim's or
  neovim's `init.vim` or `init.lua` file. It is present in `$HOME/.config/nvim/init.vim`.
  For Stow to understand, it must be placed like this --
  `$HOME/dotfiles/nvim/.config/nvim/init.vim`

For further reading, I recommend brilliantly written Jake Weisler's [post](https://www.jakewiesler.com/blog/managing-dotfiles#understanding-stow) on GNU Stow.

### Useful Stow commands

If correctly installed, then running the command `stow --help` should list options to use
Stow. Most used commands are 

```shell
stow <packagename> # activates symlink
stow -n <packagename> # trial runs or simulates symlink generation. Effective for checking for errors
stow -D <packagename> # delete stowed package
stow -R <packagename> # restows package
```

### Activating Stow
So if we have created three subdirectories inside dotfiles say `zsh`, `git`, `nvim`, then 

```shell
stow bash git nvim
```

will activate their symlinks. 

If returned to `$HOME` and `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME` and verified, then we will see,

```shell
.gitconfig -> .dotfiles/git/.gitconfig
.zshrc -> .dotfiles/zsh/.zshrc
nvim -> ../.dotfiles/nvim/.config/nvim
```

The most awesome thing in all this is, the directory structure needs to be created only
once. For future requirement, one simply clones the dotfiles directory and activates
symlinks. 

## Storing files in Git
The dotfiles directory now becomes important to store in a remote location for safe
keeping. Usually a git repository is the preferred method. For instructions on how to use
git, look up various tutorials on Git in the internet.

In summary, I have written a short, albeit technical write up on GNU Stow, and its uses for
storing dotfiles.
Feel free to ask questions in the comments or via various means linked in the blog. 
